So, good afternoon. We've all had such a great privilege and good karma to have met the Dharma
in our life, received some degree of teachings, and had the great opportunity to think about them
and practice them. So how wonderful. So just like always, we're always reminded before any study,
any contemplation, any practice, just reflecting on our motivation and really reconnecting with
our heart of hearts, our joy and appreciation for this precious moment so fleeting and yet so pure
and beautiful, and really would connect with that joy, that devotion and appreciation for
this precious moment and the arena that it's in. And then with that, just really truly expanding
our bodhicitta, really spreading it out to all limitless beings and really, really connecting
with that wish, you know, that this time together, this moment can truly be a vast benefit for
infinite
beings, infinite and every single one. And then too, and just again, spreading that devotion,
that joy, that all beings realize the pure land and the true nature of their own mind,
be free of all obscurations. And we'll just kind of just sit with that for a moment.
[silence]
And so it's always helpful to rely upon the beautiful frames that our
lineage has for us in which to kind of put together all the thoughts and ideas and inquiries
the Buddha has given us, and also again then for our practice as well.
And so we've been, we're here doing the nundra together, and we've been talking a little bit
more the last few times about refuge and taking refuge. And I guess an important thing, you know,
reminding myself, reminding all of us, we're here together. I have the awkward place of
being the spokesperson for all of us right now, but we've been really talking about refuge,
and what is refuge? And basically, you know, some of the things we've kind of went over,
both Lama Japa, myself, and of course we've all heard and thought and contemplated refuge. It's
nothing new. But again, from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, we're taking refuge.
That means it only gets deeper until we're fully purified of all of our obscurations,
and totally let go of all negativity, and just allow ourselves to abide undistractedly
and brilliantly in the true nature of total Buddhahood and absolute bodhicitta.
And that's the journey for all of us. And so always in the teachings there's the framework
of really, like they say, refuge is the gateway to all Buddhist practice.
That means to say that, stating the obvious, which is so beautiful with all the Buddhist teachings
in
a way, we need some interest and some trust in the Buddha and the teachings of the Buddha
and in the Sangha, which means in ourselves, of course. So our faith or our devotion, our trust,
is what all the great masters are saying, that our faith, our trust, our devotion
is the gateway to refuge. And again, like I was just saying, from now until the heart of
enlightenment,
we take refuge. That means it's not just a gateway we pass through and leave behind us.
It's awakening into the vast land of our devotion and our pure perception that only increases
through something we always hear Rinpoche state, through our joy, through our devotion,
through our courage and our commitment. And so just remembering that both in our formal practice
and in our post-meditation, in the sanctity of our shrine room or out in the world,
letting that all blend, letting that atmosphere pervade, working with our own mind.
And so again, maybe it's helpful to to rely on some of these little landmarks or frames of like,
well, what are the different degrees of faith or devotion?
You know, they say what's first, like the most basic in regard, again, here we're talking
in regard to the Buddha Dharma Sangha. You know, the first degree is just our what's called the
vivid faith or interest, interested faith, interested devotion, which is, you know,
we all have these degrees of us, right? So that's the most basic thing if we see a beautiful image
of Guru Rinpoche, or the Buddhist Shakyamuni Tara Yeshe Soja, or we have the great opportunity to
see a great master or a really well seasoned Sangha member, you know, or beautiful temple,
anything that brings out that inspiration and just that interest. And you know, that, what is it,
strikes a chord when something some image or manifestation of the Buddha Dharma Sangha
strikes a chord in our heart that feels familiar.
And keeping fresh with that, so that's important.
And then the second degree is what's called like, eager faith, eager devotion, longing devotion,
which is when we actually want to, want to know more.
We actually want our drawn to start to learn and start to seek out and to begin to practice.
And that means we're also beginning to learn more about what is the Dharma about?
What are the four seals? What are the four noble truths? What is the Buddha? What is the Dharma?
What is the Sangha? Who is Guru Rinpoche? What was the life of the Buddha? You know,
all these things, we actually feel the interest to learn more about. What is karma? Oh,
what, what, what do we hear about in negative karma? What do you hear about the virtues of
engaging in positive karma and taming our mind, just increases our interest in our joyful effort
and commitment. And that means we've actually begun to not just hold things up on a shelf or
at a distance, we're beginning to mingle the Dharma with our mind.
And by practice and having more experience, we're having a little, maybe a little more direct
understanding of the Dharma and then more insight into the nature. And then that begins to become
what's called like irreversible devotion or unshakable devotion, like really confident.
And that's, that's that confident devotion is maybe where our trust is just deep. And that's
what we really want to be evoking and connecting with. Because again, with the Dharma means,
we're really seeing what's true. And both absolutely and relatively,
and all the Buddhist teachings begin, right, even with just the emptiness of self. That's a big,
big subject and a deep habit to uproot. But it's beautiful. The Buddha is smiling.
So anyway, I guess what I'm getting at is the these kind of motivations or this kind of
different degrees of our, our trust and our devotion, they may wax and wane. But keeping them
with us is so important. And that's why, again, we're always connecting with our motivation
and keeping aware of our habitual patterns, you know, are we shutting down? Are we leaning away
from something that's a little uncomfortable? Are we forgetting the Dharma? Are we forgetting the
Buddha? Are we forgetting the Sangha? Are we doubting ourselves and keeping that mindfulness
and that alertness and conscientious of keeping really the lamp of our heart alive and awake
and radiating into our day and our perceptions?
And then of course, as we move towards the Dharma, again, towards the Buddha, towards the Sangha,
like we've said, that means we're becoming more and more aware of what's unreliable,
what's troublesome, and more and more about the causes of what's troublesome.
And moving, engaging more with what's helpful, what's reliable.
And then even with that, we can, we have different kinds of motivations.
You know, the most basic motivations are just ordinary, just our basic fear and hope,
you know, where maybe the Dharma can be like a lucky charm, or, you know, or we see, you know,
we really see that we're fearing the lower realms, you know, existing in the the hell realms or the
animals or the the praetas. We're seeing, you know, we're looking towards, you know, the higher
realms, humans, asuras, gods, but still maybe that's just basic, real, kind of more common,
but ordinary, who everyone wants happiness, no one wants to suffer, right? So feeling that
motivation towards the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, just out of simple kind of fear of
samsara and hoping for, you know, better, better rebirth.
And then the more we look at the Dharma, the more we kind of have a recognition of
the law of cause and effect of causes and conditions, the cause of samsara, the cause of nirvana of
cessation, then the more we can actually, then it's not so much that we're looking for an outer
experience, but we're realizing we really have an inner responsibility for our experience.
So we're looking at karma, we have a glimmer at its effects, and
we're going to work with that, and we have some trust in that,
but yet, you know, we still maybe are fearful of results, but we want to have some,
and should have, and through our practice have a deeper trust in basic goodness.
So I guess that's as far as fears involved there is recognize our own basic ignorance,
the fear of our misperception and not knowing. So therefore we want to know more,
we want to study more, we want to contemplate more, we want to practice more.
So even in regards to the Dharma, you know,
even if we just read a line of Dharma, really thinking of it and taking it to heart
is Dharma, right? I'm kind of rambling a little bit here, but I hope it's helpful,
because what I'm talking about is really motivation and what actually makes our study,
our practice, helpful and going to move according to what we've heard our teachers say.
So really thinking about contemplating, putting the Dharma to practice, like there's two kinds
of Dharma we're heard, right? There's scripture, there's all the words, all the sutras, all the
tantras, all the words of the the Buddhas and the great masters, things for us to actually look at,
and then, but we need to contemplate it, we need to put it to practice. So the other kind of Dharma
is our realization. So even if that one sentence, you know, we could know a whole book by heart,
which is great, but if we haven't thought about it or put it, absorbed it into our heart,
that's the difference. And like Rinpoche says so much, like real, that realization Dharma
is meaning we're gonna see, look at how much more peace do we have? How much more just natural joy
do we have? Contentment? How much are we able to let go of our neurotic clings and grasping to
negative emotions and our limited world, you know, we shouldn't be threatened by learning new
things
and opening our vistas. And that's why we practice, practice peace.
And of course, the other aspect of this is being aware of, is our motivation just for ourselves?
Like we said earlier, everyone wants happiness. That's natural. But again, in regards to our
motivation, looking at, we're really trying to gauge in the motivation of, of course, benefiting
ourselves, but benefiting others really with bodhicitta compassion, thinking of all beings.
That's why like as we're doing our refuge, we're including all the beings are there with us
and our mother and father of this life, without exception. That's like the highest way of taking
refuge and motivation for the benefit of all beings. By actualizing all of our paramitas,
may we truly be of benefit for all beings.
And from, from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama,
the three jewels. Sorry. The only difference that we know between a Buddha, an ordinary being like
myself, is the degree to which we recognize our nature and we're free of obscurations.
Like we all know, the Buddhas are completely free of all obscurations and in the fully awakened
state.
And sentient beings to different degrees have that same, the same beautiful nature,
wisdom, love, compassion, but haven't recognized it in different degrees.
When we've entered the path of all the noble Sangha from ordinary beings to the Pratyaka Buddhas,
to the Shravakas, all the bodhisattvas, moving through all the ripenings of the Bhumis
to the fully enlightened Buddhas, every single one of them at some point had a teacher.
And here our teacher is Guru Padmasambhava, embodiment of all the Buddhas of the three times.
And again in Guru Padmasambhava said so beautifully and also Buddha Shakyamuni,
devotion is so critical. Devotion, faith, it's what opens us to
the whole beautiful realm of recognizing and realizing what the Dharma is all about.
So
I think I'm going to maybe stop there.
When I saw just again, just a beautiful thing to keep in mind, like as we're
doing the refuge practice, of course we all have things, but
just as in the way Guru Rinpoche is the embodiment of all the Buddhas of the three times,
knows all the teachings of all the Buddhas, his embodiment of all the Sanghas,
is inseparable from our own precious teacher in this life.
The mind of the Buddha is the ultimate refuge, the mind of the Lama, the realization of the Lama
is the ultimate refuge. And our devotion to the blessings, our devotion opening to those
blessings of realization and recognition to ripen our own heart is beautiful precious relationship.
You know the Lama's recognized completely and unshakably the open vastness quality
of mind and it's the inseparability of the vivid, brilliant clarity of the energy of of mind
and it's all-pervading compassion, you know, that's the three kayas.
There's nothing outside and again and the Lama is there with us.
Our devotion opening to that recognition applying the teachings to recognize the vastness
of our own mind and emptiness of our own mind, clarity of our own mind, compassionate,
pervading compassion of our experience is beautiful and that's again the ultimate way of taking
refuge.
So Patra Rinpoche says that in the beautiful just praise to the to the Lama crowned with the three
jewels of the outer refuge you've realized the three roots, the inner refuge, you've actualized
the three kayas, the ultimate refuge, peerless teacher to you I bow down, we let go, we trust,
we open, we stand with great bodhicitta, great joy, great devotion and keep going.
So let's keep going.